# symb386: Restricted Instruction Set i386 Simulator
(C) 2013, Andreas Abel, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich
    2018, Ulrich Schöpp, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich

The main purpose of this simulator is to test i386 code
generated by a compiler before register allocation. Therefore,
it supports temporaries, an potentially infinite amount of extra registers
`t0`, `t1`, `t2`, ...  (Of course, it can also be used to execute symbolic
assembler after register allocation.)

The supported instruction set is very restricted but
sufficient to write a compiler for MiniJava
[Andrew Appel, Modern Compiler Implementation in Java].

## System requirements

You need a recent version of the Haskell Platform.

## Installation

A pre-compiled binary (suitable for CIP-pool) is included: [symb386](./symb386).

Install using Haskell's package manager cabal

```
    cabal install
```
or using stack

```
    stack install
```

## Running the simulator

```
  symb386 input-file.s
```

A detailed exectution trace is shown with option `-v`:
```
  symb386 -v input-file.s
```

## Format of the input file

The input file must be symbolic assembler in Intel format.

Here is a small example. Note that in addition to actual registers, it uses
register variables, which are named `t0`, `t1`, `t2`, ...

```
Lmain:
        push    %ebp
        mov     %ebp, %esp
L3:     push    0
        call    L_halloc
        add     %esp, 4
        mov     t1001, %eax
        push    10
        push    t1001
        call    LFac$ComputeFac
        add     %esp, 8
        mov     t1002, %eax
        push    t1002
        call    L_println_int
        add     %esp, 4
L4:     leave
        ret
        .type LFac$ComputeFac, @function
LFac$ComputeFac:
        push    %ebp
        mov     %ebp, %esp
L5:     cmp     DWORD PTR [%ebp+12], 1
        jl      L0
        jmp     L1
L2:     mov     %eax, t8
        jmp     L6
L1:     mov     t1004, DWORD PTR [%ebp+12]
        mov     t1005, -1
        add     t1005, DWORD PTR [%ebp+12]
        push    t1005
        push    DWORD PTR [%ebp+8]
        call    LFac$ComputeFac
        add     %esp, 8
        mov     t1003, %eax
        mov     %eax, t1004
        imul    t1003
        mov     t8, %eax
        jmp     L2
L0:     mov     t8, 1
        jmp     L2
L6:     leave
        ret
```


### Lexing rules:
(If you want to be sure, read the .x file, the lexer specification.)

* White space is ignored (except as separator for alphanumeric tokens).

* Lines beginning with a dot '.' are skipped.
  These lines are pragmas for the symbolic assembler,
  which symb386 ignores.

* Lines beginning with a hash-symbol followed by a space
  are comments, which are ignored as well.
* Valid tokens are
```
    [ ] : , . + - *
    dword ptr                    DWORD PT
    mov lea                      MOV LEA
    add sub imul                 ADD SUB IMUL
    idiv inc dec neg             IDIV INC DEC NEG
    shl shr sal sar              SHL SHR SAL SAR
    and or xor                   AND OR XOR
    not                          NOT
    cmp                          CMP
    je jne jl jle jge            JE JNE JL JLE JGE
    jmp call ret                 JMP CALL RET
    push pop enter leave         PUSH POP ENTER LEAVE
    nop                          NO
    eax ebx ecx edx esi edi ebp esp
    %eax %ebx %ecx %edx %esi %edi %ebp %esp
    t<number>   (denoting a temporary register)
    <ident>     (given by reg.ex. [a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_'$]*)
                Identifiers are used for labels
```


### Parsing rules:
(If you want to know all of them, read the .y file)

1. The input file must be a list of i386 assembler
   instructions in Intel syntax.  The supported structions
   are listed above.
   Each instruction may be preceded by a label.
   Conditional and unconditional jumps are only allowed to
   a label, and only to one defined in the same procedure.
   Cross-procedure jumps or jumps to a calculated address
   are not supported.
   Calls and jumps are only allowed to a label.

2. There must be one label called `Lmain`.
   This one is taken as the entry point.

4. Restrictions for individual instructions:
   * `RET`    does accept arguments
   * `ENTER`  is only supported in the form `ENTER <number>, 0`
   * many more

## Runtime

symb386 knows a number of predefined procedures.  They
expect their arguments on the stack (cdecl calling convention)
and return the result in `eax`.
* `L_halloc`
  - One argument: number of bytes to allocate on the heap
  - Result    : pointer to first allocated byte.
* `L_println_int`
  - One argument: signed 32bit integer value to print
  - Result    : nothing
* `L_write`
  - One argument: byte to print
  - Result    : nothing
* `L_read`
  - no Arguments
  - Result    : byte read from `stdin`
* `L_raise`
  - One argument: error code
  - Result    : nothing, does not return, stops execution

## Execution specialties

symb386 supports 5 different types, all of size 32 bits:

1. Signed integers.

2. Heap addresses.

   Heap addresses consist of a base address which was obtained
   by `L_halloc` plus an offset.  The offset must be a multiple of 4.

   Memory access to uninitialized memory locations is
   treated as illegal.

3. Stack addresses.

   %esp and %ebp may only be loaded with stack addresses.

4. Programm addresses.

   Get pushed onto the stack by a CALL.

5. Undefined values.

  To find compilation errors, symb386 treats all access to undefined
  memory locations as an error.
